HOWTO on Route64 for IPv6 TunnelBroker set up (#1147)
jamulussoftware/jamulussoftware.github.io: _posts/2026-06-07-Route64-IPv6-Setup.md

# IPv6 via Route64 Tunnelbroker on Ubuntu Server

A complete guide to setting up IPv6 connectivity using Route64's Wireguard tunnelbroker,

> routing it to your LAN, and making it work correctly for all devices including Windows and Android.

Reviewer: Add a note that there are also others available such as hurricane electric's tunnelbroker. Route64 seems very convenient in Europe but not so much in Asia.

# IPv6 via Route64 Tunnelbroker on Ubuntu Server

A complete guide to setting up IPv6 connectivity using Route64's Wireguard tunnelbroker,
routing it to your LAN, and making it work correctly for all devices including Windows and Android.

    Copyright (C) 2026  Peter L Jones

    This document is licesed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
    To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/

The initial set up here was guided by Claude AI.  Testing was done with the help of @ann0see and @softins.

> If you need help with anything, first read the [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) section and then try Claude AI.

Reviewer: I'd not suggest any LLM here...

> If Route64 does not have a hub near you, you should find an alternative tunnelbroker supplier.
> Adding the tunnel introduces latency, so choose a provider with a hub close to you for best performance.

1. Go to [https://route64.org](https://route64.org) and create an account.
2. Verify your email address.
3. Note your public IPv4 address (e.g. `198.51.100.154`) — you'll need it when creating the tunnel.
   Check it with: `curl -s https://api4.ipify.org`

---

## 2. Create a Tunnelbroker

1. Log into Route64 and navigate to **Tunnelbroker → Add Tunnelbroker**.
2. Choose **Wireguard4** as the tunnel type.
3. Select the hub closest to you (e.g. `lon1.uk` for London).
4. Enter your public IPv4 address as **Your Endpoint**.
5. Submit — Route64 will allocate:
   - A `/64` transport network (e.g. `2001:db8:f06:af::/64`)
     - Their end: `::1`
     - Your end: `::2`
   - A `/56` routed prefix (e.g. `2001:db8:1400:af00::/56`)
   - Their WAN endpoint IP and port
   - A Wireguard public key

6. Download or copy the Wireguard config from the tunnel detail page.

---

## 3. Check Your Router/Modem

Before proceeding, check your router admin page for anything that could interfere:

> - **IPv6 settings** — if IPv6 is enabled on the router, **disable it**. The router sending

Reviewer: I'm not fully sure if that's really the case. I think there were cases where RAs from multiple routers aren't a problem.

Author: Could you give examples.  In my case it caused a problem and there was no alternative solution.

Reviewer: In your case, if your router and your server don't advertise the same prefixes, it should be fine as far as I understood it. 
Router -> ULA (local only)
Server -> the Route64 prefix (global only).

You may need to set different priorities though. 
Just killing IPv6 fully might remove other IPv6 functionality from the router. So it may not be reachable over IPv6?

https://networklessons.com/ipv6/ipv6-router-advertisement-preference

Author: In my case, I had zero IPv6 on the LAN.  I tried turning on IPv6 on the modem to see if it would work with any tunnel supplier but it forgets its state on reboot, which is useless.  Then I forgot to disable it again, so it was offering useless IPv6 addresses.

I'll add a note saying this is for where you have no existing IPv6.

  Router Advertisements (RAs) to the LAN will conflict with your server's RAs later.
  Even with IPv6 "disabled", check it isn't sending RAs:
  ```bash
  sudo tcpdump -i en0 -v "icmp6 and dst ff02::1" 2>&1 | grep "router advertisement" | head -5
  ```
  If you see RAs from anything other than your server, disable IPv6 on the router.

- **Firewall** — ensure the router passes through UDP on the Wireguard port
  (check the Route64 tunnel detail page for the endpoint port, e.g. `20048`).
  Most domestic routers do this automatically for outbound-initiated connections.

---

## 4. Configure the Wireguard Tunnel

Create the Wireguard config file. Replace values with those from your Route64 tunnel page:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/wireguard/wg0.conf
```

```ini
[Interface]
PrivateKey = <your private key>
Address = 2001:db8:f06:af::2/64

[Peer]
PublicKey = <route64 public key>
AllowedIPs = ::/1, 8000::/1
Endpoint = 185.121.24.12:20048
PersistentKeepalive = 15
```

Notes:
- `Address` is your `::2` transport address with `/64`

> - `AllowedIPs = ::/1, 8000::/1` covers all IPv6 (split into two halves to avoid

Reviewer: Looks a bit weird? Is this really the best way to do this?

Author: `::/0` looks even weirder, may cause syntax errors or trigger special processing.  This avoids such pitfalls.

sudo netplan apply
```

Verify:
```bash
ip -6 addr show dev en0
```

You should see both `af00::1` and `af01::1` addresses.

---

## 6. Add the Routing Config for wg0

Create a systemd-networkd config for the wg0 interface to make routes persistent
(wg-quick sets these but they can be lost on systemd-networkd restarts):

```bash
sudo nano /etc/systemd/network/wg0.network
```

```ini
[Match]
Name=wg0

[Network]
Address=2001:db8:f06:af::2/64

[Route]
Destination=2001:db8:1400:af00::/56
Metric=100

[Route]
Destination=::/1
Scope=global
Metric=512
PreferredSource=2001:db8:1400:af00::1

[Route]
Destination=8000::/1
Scope=global
Metric=512
PreferredSource=2001:db8:1400:af00::1
```

The `PreferredSource` setting is critical — without it, reply packets from services on the
server use the tunnel transport address (`2001:db8:f06:af::2`) rather than your public
address (`2001:db8:1400:af00::1`). Remote clients will discard replies that come from an
unexpected source address.

```bash
sudo systemctl restart systemd-networkd
```

Verify routes:
```bash
ip -6 route show | grep -E "::/1|8000::|af00"
```

You should see all three routes via `wg0`.

---

## 7. Suppress SLAAC Address on the Server

> The server will autoconfigure an EUI-64 address from the RA it sends to the LAN.

Reviewer: Are you sure this happens really?

Author: Yes.  I could see it happening.  It caused all kinds of confusion on the LAN and externally.

This causes source address selection problems (services reply from the wrong address).
Suppress it with a systemd-networkd drop-in:

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/network/10-netplan-en0.network.d
sudo tee /etc/systemd/network/10-netplan-en0.network.d/no-slaac.conf << 'EOF'
[Network]
IPv6AcceptRA=no

[IPv6AcceptRA]
UseAutonomousPrefix=no
EOF
```

```bash
sudo systemctl restart systemd-networkd
```

Verify only static addresses remain:
```bash
ip -6 addr show dev en0
```

You should see only `af00::1`, `af01::1`, and the `fe80::` link-local — no dynamic addresses.

---

## 8. Enable IPv6 Forwarding

```bash
sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/99-ipv6-forward.conf << 'EOF'
net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1
net.ipv6.conf.en0.forwarding=1
EOF

sudo sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1
```

---

## 9. Configure nftables

Add IPv6 firewall rules. Adjust the sets and ports to match your services.

> This example includes Jamulus (a music collaboration app) as a template for UDP services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example includes Jamulus as a template for UDP services.
```

```bash
# Create sets

> sudo nft add set ip6 filter TcpOpen '{ type inet_service; elements = { 80, 443, 1022 } }'

Reviewer: Do you really want this? We should be very specific to Jamulus...

Author: You want a firewall.

You want it easy to manage.

Using sets gives you that.

(What this guide misses is setting the IPv4 side, in case you weren't using nft before at all... I should mention that, too.)

Reviewer: But why do you add exactly those ports? To me this looks overly specific to your usecase.

Author: Read the preceding comment:
> Add IPv6 firewall rules. Adjust the sets and ports to match your services.

I've added an extra note to suggest looking at existing IPv4 ports as a basis.

Author: I've also added some more notes for on-going maintenance of `nft`.  (I'm a recent convert from iptables, to which I was a convert from ipchains/ipfwadm.  Never touched `ufw` for my needs.)

sudo nft add set ip6 filter TcpLocal '{ type inet_service; flags interval; elements = { 22, 139, 445, 1714-1764, 5357-5358, 8022 } }'

# Create INPUT chain with drop policy
sudo nft add chain ip6 filter INPUT '{ type filter hook input priority filter; policy drop; }'
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter INPUT ct state established,related accept
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter INPUT ct state invalid drop
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter INPUT iif lo accept
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter INPUT meta l4proto ipv6-icmp accept

> sudo nft add rule ip6 filter INPUT iif en0 ip6 saddr { fd5e::/16, fd5f::/16 } tcp dport @TcpLocal accept

Reviewer: That's specific to you?

Author: > ULAs are roughly analogous to RFC1918 private IPv4 addresses (10.0.0.0/8, 192.168.0.0/16, etc.)

Just randomly picked.  I guess they need adding to the list at the top...

> RFC 4193 recommends generating a random 40-bit Global ID

(beneath the `fd` part) to give something like `fd12:3456:789a::/48`.  But they're reserved for local use.

Actually, I'll check if they're in use.  Might be stale configuration.

Author: OK, so:
* the `fd00:/8` is the internal network, regardless of the interface
* the `fe80:/10` is the internal network, specific to this interface connection

Looks like the `fd00:/8` was what I was getting from the router/modem and shouldn't be there.  I've not got it in my nft rules.

---
layout: post
title: "IPv6 via Route64 Tunnelbroker on Ubuntu Server"
lang: "en"
author: "pljones"
heading: "Setting up IPv6 connectivity using Route64's Wireguard tunnelbroker"
---

> > Copyright (C) 2026  Peter L Jones

Reviewer: I'd move this to the end.

Author: No.  Copyright statements come as early in the document as possible.  Otherwise the reader might not see them.

> 
> This document is licesed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
> To view a copy of this license, visit [https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

This is a complete guide to setting up IPv6 connectivity using Route64's Wireguard tunnelbroker, routing it to your LAN, and making it work correctly for all devices including Windows and Android.

The initial set up here was guided by Claude AI.  Testing was done with the help of @ann0see and @softins.
@dtinth has "field tested" the guide to set up a similar Route64 tunnel for the Asia Directory.

> 

Reviewer: Add the more comment here

Author: Oh, guess so.

> If you need help with anything, first read the [Troubleshooting](/kb/2026/06/07/Route64-IPv6-Setup#troubleshooting) section.

Author: Is there a better way to do this?  Just `[Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)` fails on the index page for the Knowledge Base.

Reviewer: I think as soon as you're in the correct page will be linked correctly. Checkout the other files which have a \<!-- more--> comment

Author: Yes, once you've gone into the main page.  I'm talking about whilst you're on the index page.

Author: Ah, seen your comment below now.  Makes sense.

    └── wg0  — Wireguard tunnel to Route64
```

---

## 1. Register with Route64

> [!NOTE]
> If Route64 does not have a hub near you, you should find an alternative tunnelbroker supplier.
> Adding the tunnel introduces latency, so choose a provider with a hub close to you for best performance.

1. Go to [https://route64.org](https://route64.org) and create an account.
2. Verify your email address.
3. Note your public IPv4 address (e.g. `198.51.100.154`) — you'll need it when creating the tunnel.
   Check it with: `curl -s https://api4.ipify.org`

---

## 2. Create a Tunnelbroker

1. Log into Route64 and navigate to **Tunnelbroker → Add Tunnelbroker**.
2. Choose **Wireguard4** as the tunnel type.
3. Select the hub closest to you (e.g. `lon1.uk` for London).
4. Enter your public IPv4 address as **Your Endpoint**.
5. Submit — Route64 will allocate:
   - A `/64` transport network (e.g. `2001:db8:f06:af::/64`)
     - Their end: `::1`
     - Your end: `::2`
   - A `/56` routed prefix (e.g. `2001:db8:1400:af00::/56`)
   - Their WAN endpoint IP and port
   - A Wireguard public key

6. Download or copy the Wireguard config from the tunnel detail page.

---

## 3. Check Your Router/Modem

> The following presumes you currently have _no existing IPv6 usage on your LAN_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section presumes you currently have _no existing IPv6 usage on your LAN_
```

and no external IPv6 connectivity (otherwise you would not need the tunnel).

Before proceeding, check your router admin page for anything that could interfere:

- **IPv6 settings** — if IPv6 is enabled on the router, **disable it**. The router sending
  Router Advertisements (RAs) to the LAN will conflict with your server's RAs later.
  Even with IPv6 "disabled", check it isn't sending RAs:
  ```bash
  sudo tcpdump -i en0 -v "icmp6 and dst ff02::1" 2>&1 | grep "router advertisement" | head -5
  ```
  If you see RAs from anything other than your server, disable IPv6 on the router.

> - **Firewall** — ensure the router passes through UDP on the Wireguard port

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Firewall** — ensure the router passes UDP traffic through on the Wireguard port
```

I'm not sure what this means. How does a router pass through UDP?

sudo netplan apply
```

Verify:
```bash
ip -6 addr show dev en0
```

You should see both `af00::1` and `af01::1` addresses.

---

## 6. Add the Routing Config for wg0

Create a systemd-networkd config for the wg0 interface to make routes persistent
(wg-quick sets these but they can be lost on systemd-networkd restarts):

```bash
sudo nano /etc/systemd/network/wg0.network
```

```ini
[Match]
Name=wg0

[Network]
Address=2001:db8:f06:af::2/64

[Route]
Destination=2001:db8:1400:af00::/56
Metric=100

[Route]
Destination=::/1
Scope=global
Metric=512
PreferredSource=2001:db8:1400:af00::1

[Route]
Destination=8000::/1
Scope=global
Metric=512
PreferredSource=2001:db8:1400:af00::1
```

The `PreferredSource` setting is critical — without it, reply packets from services on the
server use the tunnel transport address (`2001:db8:f06:af::2`) rather than your public
address (`2001:db8:1400:af00::1`). Remote clients will discard replies that come from an
unexpected source address.

```bash
sudo systemctl restart systemd-networkd
```

Verify routes:
```bash
ip -6 route show | grep -E "::/1|8000::|af00"
```

You should see all three routes via `wg0`.

---

## 7. Suppress SLAAC Address on the Server

> The server will autoconfigure an EUI-64 address from the RA it sends to the LAN.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The server will autoconfigure an EUI-64 address using the RA it sends to the LAN.
```

(I don't know anything about this topic.)

> This causes source address selection problems (services reply from the wrong address).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This causes problems when selecting source addresses, because services reply from the wrong address.
```

Author: No, that doesn't get the meaning.  The problem is source address selection.  Once the wrong source address is selected, the response is using that address.  It's not wrong from the far end's perspective.  It's only wrong at the source.

```

Tighten the FORWARD chain (get existing rule handles first):
```bash
sudo nft -a list chain ip6 filter FORWARD
# Note the handle numbers of the existing Docker jump rules, then:
sudo nft delete rule ip6 filter FORWARD handle <N>
sudo nft delete rule ip6 filter FORWARD handle <N>

sudo nft add rule ip6 filter FORWARD ct state established,related accept
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter FORWARD ct state invalid drop
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter FORWARD iifname "en0" oifname "wg0" accept
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter FORWARD iifname "wg0" oifname "en0" accept
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter FORWARD counter jump DOCKER-USER
sudo nft add rule ip6 filter FORWARD counter jump DOCKER-FORWARD
sudo nft chain ip6 filter FORWARD '{ policy drop; }'
```

**Important:** Use `iifname`/`oifname` (string match) rather than `iif`/`oif` (index match)
for wg0 rules — the interface must exist at rule load time for `iif`, but wg0 may not be
up when nftables starts at boot.

Save the ruleset:
```bash
sudo nft list ruleset | sudo tee /etc/nftables.conf
sudo systemctl enable nftables
```
You probably want to get familiar with the content of `/etc/nftables.conf`.

> I find it vastly easier to edit the file and reload the service than to use `nft` commands for ongoing maintenance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For ongoing maintenance, I find it much easier to edit the file and reload the service than to use `nft` commands.
```

Author: Editorial prerogative.

Reviewer 2: This link discusses introductory elements: https://lemongrad.com/introductory-element/

> In fact, I keep a copy under version control then copy it over the original when I commit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, I keep a copy under version control and copy it over the original when I commit.
```

Author: Order is important.

> So long as I avoid completely locking myself out with a bad ruleset, this works well for me.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This works well so long as I avoid locking myself out with a bad ruleset.
```

> (Remember to check the ruleset with `sudo nft -c list ruleset` before applying, to catch syntax errors and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Always enter `sudo nft -c list ruleset` to check the ruleset before applying, to catch syntax errors and
```

spot severe breakage.)

---

## 10. Set Up radvd for LAN Clients

Install radvd to advertise your IPv6 prefix to LAN clients via SLAAC:

```bash
sudo apt install radvd
sudo nano /etc/radvd.conf
```

```
interface en0 {
    AdvSendAdvert on;
    AdvManagedFlag off;
    AdvOtherConfigFlag off;
    MinRtrAdvInterval 5;
    MaxRtrAdvInterval 10;
    AdvDefaultLifetime 1800;
    prefix 2001:db8:1400:af01::/64 {
        AdvOnLink on;
        AdvAutonomous on;
        AdvRouterAddr on;
    };
    RDNSS 2606:4700:4700::1111 2001:4860:4860::8888 {
        AdvRDNSSLifetime 600;
    };
};
```

Notes:

> - `AdvDefaultLifetime 1800` — critical for Android; too short a lifetime causes Android

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `AdvDefaultLifetime 1800` — critical for Android! If the lifetime is too short, Android won't set a default IPv6 route.
```

  to not set a default IPv6 route
- `MinRtrAdvInterval 5` / `MaxRtrAdvInterval 10` — send RAs frequently enough that

>   clients don't lose their default route between advertisements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  clients don't lose their default route between advertisements.
```

> - `RDNSS` — provides IPv6 DNS servers; without this Android won't use IPv6 for name resolution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `RDNSS` — provides IPv6 DNS servers; without this Android won't use IPv6 for name resolution.
```

ping6 2001:db8:f06:af::1

# Addresses present
ip -6 addr show dev en0 | grep -E "af00|af01"

# Routes present
ip -6 route show | grep -E "::/1|8000::|af00"

# radvd running
systemctl is-active radvd

# nftables loaded
sudo nft list chain ip6 filter INPUT | grep policy
```

All should be healthy without any manual intervention.

---

## Troubleshooting

### Useful sites
- Route64 support: [https://route64.org/support](https://route64.org/support)
- HE.net looking glass: [https://lg.he.net/](https://lg.he.net)
- IPv6 test: [https://test-ipv6.com](https://test-ipv6.com)

### BGP not needed
Route64 uses static routing — your `/56` is routed to your tunnel IP automatically.
Do not install FRR or configure BGP.

### Tunnel up but no external IPv6
Check the default routes are present:
```bash
ip -6 route show | grep -E "::/1|8000::"
```
If missing, restart wg-quick:
```bash
sudo systemctl restart wg-quick@wg0
```

### LAN clients have IPv6 address but no internet
Check IPv6 forwarding is enabled:
```bash
sysctl net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding
```
Check the default routes are present (see above).
Check the FORWARD chain allows `en0 → wg0`.

### Android not getting default IPv6 route

> - Ensure `AdvDefaultLifetime` is at least 1800 in radvd.conf

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ensure `AdvDefaultLifetime` is at least 1800 in radvd.conf.
```

> - Ensure the router/modem is NOT sending Router Advertisements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ensure the router/modem is NOT sending Router Advertisements.
```

  (check with `sudo tcpdump -i en0 -v "icmp6 and dst ff02::1"`)

> - Toggle WiFi off/on on the phone after changing radvd config

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Toggle WiFi off/on on the phone after changing radvd config.
```
